JUDY WOODRUFF, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
DONALD TRUMP, PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES: The fundamental
question of our time is whether
the West has the
will to survive.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: President Trump's
stark message in Poland --
signaling a fight to preserve
Western civilization,
a day before meeting
Russian President Putin.
Then, retail giant Hobby Lobby
agrees to pay $3 million and
return thousands of smuggled
Iraqi artifacts, as the
company's devout Christian
president plans to open
a museum of the bible
just blocks from the
nation's capitol.
And -- a salute to the
father of rock 'n' roll.
A new album showcases
Chuck Berry's enduring
influence on American music.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: He's
one of the primary sonic
architects of rock and roll.
So, he helped establish this
art form that we all know and
love, and that really sort
of took over the world.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour".
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: President Trump faced
dramatically different crowds
as he made his way across
Europe today.
His second overseas trip began
in Poland, before he moved
on to Hamburg, Germany, the
site of the summit of
leaders of the major
industrialized nations.
Special correspondent
Ryan Chilcote reports.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
RYAN CHILCOTE, PBS NEWSHOUR
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
(voice-over): President
Trump kicked off his
second trip to Europe by doing
something he was criticized
for not doing on his first:
offering America's full
commitment to the NATO alliance.
TRUMP: The United States has
demonstrated not merely with
words but with its actions
that we stand firmly
behind Article 5, the
mutual defense commitment.
Words are easy but
actions are what matters.
CHILCOTE: Mr. Trump was
addressing a friendly
crowd of some 15,000
in Warsaw, Poland, some
of the spectators bused
in by the country's
center-right governing party.
To the delight of Poles
concerned about Russia,
their neighbor to the
east, he declared the
West would triumph over
its many adversaries.
TRUMP: The fundamental question
of our time is whether the
West has the will to survive.
I declare today for the
world to hear that the West
will never, ever be broken.
Our values will prevail, our
people will thrive, and our
civilization will triumph.
CHILCOTE: The president, though,
reiterated criticism of some
NATO allies in Western Europe
for not committing more
to defense spending.
Mr. Trump also offered his
most forceful condemnation
yet of Russia, just a
day before his meeting
with President Vladimir Putin.
TRUMP: We urge Russia to cease
its destabilizing activities in
Ukraine and elsewhere and its
support for hostile regimes,
including Syria and Iran, and
to instead join the community
of responsible nations.
CHILCOTE: Hours earlier, at a
press conference with Poland's
president, though, Mr. Trump
skirted questions about Russian
meddling in the 2016 election.
REPORTER: Will you once and for
all, yes or no, definitively
say that Russia interfered
with the 2016 election?
TRUMP: Well, I think it
was Russia and I think
it could've been other
people and other countries.
It could've been a lot
of people interfered.
Nobody really knows, nobody
really knows for sure.
CHILCOTE: Mr. Trump also
cast blame on former
President Barack Obama.
TRUMP: I think what happened is
that he thought Hillary Clinton
was going to win the election
and he said, let's not
do anything about it.
Had he thought the other
way, he would have done
something about it.
CHILCOTE: President Trump
then flew to Hamburg,
Germany for the G20 Summit.
There he met German
Chancellor Angela Merkel.
The two have publicly tussled
on a variety of issues including
trade and climate change.
All the while the "welcome to
hell" protest, its actual title,
was already under way, turning
violent almost immediately.
Thousands of protesters clashed
with police in riot gear who
used water cannons to disperse
crowds.
Others rushed demonstrators,
tackling them to the ground.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
CHILCOTE: President Trump's
most important meeting
is, of course, tomorrow.
That will be his first
ever meeting with the
president of Russia -- Judy.
WOODRUFF: And, Ryan,
you've covered the Kremlin.
How do you think Mr. Putin is
going to react to what President
Trump had to say today about
Russia's interference
in last year's election?
CHILCOTE: Well, look, I don't
think that President Putin
will like those remarks.
At the same time, I think in
a way he will appreciate that
they were made in Poland and
not here at the G20 Summit, not
alongside the Russian president.
You know, they're well
aware that President Trump
is optically challenged.
It will be very difficult
for him to say something
pro-Russian at this point.
They feel that, at this point,
it would be very difficult
for him to really achieve much
when it comes to improving the
Russian-American relationship.
They just don't want to
see it get any worse.
So, I think they'll think
that he was sort of speaking
to the crowd, speaking to the
parlor, if you will, and what
really matters is what President
Trump tells them in that
- - or tells President
Putin in that room when
it comes to policy, and
namely what President
Putin is hoping is two
things, that one, President
Trump will perhaps listen
to some of the issues
that he has with the Ukrainian
side, when it comes to
Russia's conflict in Ukraine,
and secondly, President Putin
will be hoping that he can use
Russia's precedence in Syria,
what Russia is doing in Syria
as a bridge to the United
States, find some kind of common
ground, encourage President
Trump to pursue for example
Islamic State in Syria together
with Syria.
That is a whole lot
of challenges but that
has always been the
Russians' big hope that
they can team up with the United
States or at least the lower
the level, the temperature
in the relationship by
working together in Syria.
WOODRUFF: Ryan Chilcote
reporting for us from
Hamburg, thank you.
CHILCOTE: Thank you.
WOODRUFF: And we'll hear more
about President Trump's visit
to Poland and Germany, after
the news summary.
In the day's other news,
world powers are jousting over
how to handle North Korea's
test of an intercontinental
ballistic missile.
The president of China,
Pyongyang's closest ally,
called for restraint.
In Europe earlier today,
President Trump says
he still hopes that
Beijing can help resolve
the North Koreans'
tensions, but said the U.S.
has a range of options.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
TRUMP: I don't like to talk
about what I have planned.
But I have some pretty
severe things that we
are thinking about.
That does not mean we
are going to do them.
I don't draw red lines.
It's a shame that they're
behaving this way, but
they are behaving in
a very, very dangerous
manner and something will
have to be done about it.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, there's
word that it was Russia that
blocked the U.N. Security
Council's approval of
a statement strongly
condemning that launch.
The Trump administration
has renewed its offer
to cooperate with Russia
over the Syria conflict.
In a statement last night,
Secretary of State Rex
Tillerson said the U.S.
is open to coordinating
on no fly-zones in Syria.
Later, State Department
spokeswoman Heather Nauert said
the broader American strategy
remains the same.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
HEATHER NAUERT, STATE
DEPARTMENT SPOKESWOMAN:
If our two countries
can establish stability
on the ground, we believe
that will lay a foundation
for progress on the
political settlement
of Syria's future.
The policy has not changed,
some of the words and some of
the phrasing may have changed
at this point, but overall,
it's just one of a series of
options that the United States
will now consider.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: For his part, Russia's
foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov,
asked for more information
on the proposal, but said
cooperation is, quote, a
step in the right direction.
A survey commissioned by the
State Department shows diplomats
are frustrated and confused
by the Trump administration.
"The Wall Street Journal"
first reported on the document,
which was released to State
Department employees yesterday.
It comes as the president seeks
drastic cuts to diplomatic
and development funding.
Separately, the State Department
is saying the U.S. refugee
admissions program won't
be suspended until next week.
After the Supreme Court
upheld part of the Trump
administration's travel
ban, re-settlement
agencies were told to
schedule refugee arrivals
only through today.
But it's been announced that
they can now continue until July
12th, when refugee admissions
are expected to hit
their cap of 50,000.
The government ethics director
who has prodded the Trump
administration over conflicts of
interest is resigning.
Walter Shaub is stepping
down months before his
term was set to expire.
In a statement on Twitter, he
said: It has become clear to
me that we need improvements
to the existing ethics program.
This follows the resignation
of a top Justice Department
official over ethics concerns.
Democratic attorneys general
in 18 states and the District
of Columbia are suing Education
Secretary Betsy DeVos,
over her delay of rules
on for-profit colleges.
The lawsuit demands the
implementation of the
rules created under the
Obama administration.
They're meant to cancel the
student-loan debt of people
defrauded by those schools.
The Illinois House of
Representatives has voted to
over-ride the governor's veto of
a budget package.
It means that Illinois
will have its first annual
spending plan since 2015.
That is the longest
state fiscal crisis since
the Great Depression.
Lawmakers voted 71 to 42 to
approve the $36 billion budget
plan, which is funded with
a $5 billion income
tax increase.
On Wall Street today, stocks
had their biggest drop in more
than six weeks, amid signs that
hiring has slowed.
The Dow Jones Industrial
Average lost 158 points
to close at 21320.
The Nasdaq fell 61 points, and
the S&P 500 dropped almost 23.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what's behind protests and
reaction in Europe to President
Trump's visit today, Hobby Lobby
accused of illegally importing
artifacts, a city in New
York that sees refugees
as a boon for economic
development, and much more.
(MUSIC)
WOODRUFF: As we've heard,
President Trump has voiced,
at times, contradictory views
on the U.S.'s relationship
with its European
allies and with Russia.
To parse out where things stand
after the first full day of
the president's trip abroad
and the road ahead, we
turn to Paula Dobriansky.
She was under secretary
of state for democracy
and global affairs
during the George W. Bush
administration.
She's now a senior fellow
at Harvard University and
she joins us from Warsaw.
And Karen Donfried was special
assistant to the president and
senior director for European
affairs on the National
Security Council during
the Obama administration.
She's now the president
of the German Marshall
Fund in the U.S., an
organization which seeks
to straighten
relations with Europe.
And we welcome both
of you to the program.
Paula Dobriansky, to
you first in Warsaw.
Overall, what would you say
the message is from President
Trump that's come across to
his European listeners?
PAUL DOBRIANSKY, FORMER
GEORGE W. BUSH STATE
DEPARTMENT OFFICIAL:
Well, the primary message
was that European security
matters to us greatly,
that towards that end that
the forward deployment
of our troops on the
border matter greatly.
They reassure not just the
Poles but the neighborhood.
And also the important of the
alliance, that Article 5, our
collective defense is crucial
and toward that end, that
alliance has played an
important role in the past.
It does now and it
will in the future.
And let me just add, combined
with that, it was very clear
that, related, the president
also made it very clear that he
was very concerned about Russian
aggression and the need to have
a cessation of the violence
and the conflict in Ukraine,
as well as in Syria.
He talked about Islamic radical
terrorism, and then he also
talked about energy security,
which hasn't gotten a lot of
attention and it's behind me
here at the royal castle where
he gave a speech actually before
what's called the Three Seas
Summit, an initiative paid
by the Poles, the Croats and
there were 12 countries from
Central Europe that spoke to
this issue about the need
for energy dependents,
energy security and
energy efficiency and
the establishment
of an infrastructure
in Central Europe.
WOODRUFF: Karen Donfried, are
those the main messages that
to you have come across from
this trip?
KAREN DONFRIED, FORMER OBAMA
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL STAFF:
There were two things that
struck me about President
Trump's stop in Poland.
One was what a big boost
this was to the current
Polish government.
Poland is an overwhelmingly
pro-American country and that's
significant in the context of a
European Union that's been
quite critical of democratic
backsliding in Poland.
So, the European Commission
has been looking at whether
Poland is staying true to rule
of law, independent judiciary,
freedom of the press.
So, it was very significant
for this Polish government.
The second thing that struck
me was the speech he gave
that Paula just referred to.
On the one hand, had
many elements of the
traditional transatlantic
speech, reaffirming
U.S. commitment to the
Article 5, the collective
defense piece of the NATO
alliance, his support
for strong transatlantic
relationship.
But then on the other hand,
you had a dark view of a clash
of civilizations and you had
it on your opening clip, the
president's comment about the
West and our ability to stand up
to this challenge.
And I think some people
are wondering how we in
the U.S. under President
Trump are defining
that West.
WOODRUFF: Well, how do
you respond to that,
Paula Dobriansky?
Because it did raise, I think,
questions in people's minds
about what is this conflict
as the president sees it?
DOBRIANSKY: Well, first, I
think that Karen was right,
the president did highlight the
importance over decades of the
Polish relationship with the
United States and even cited the
roles of such generals,
Kosciuszko and Pilsudski.
So, our relationship
has mattered greatly.
I saw it in a broader
context, though, than
Karen had expressed.
I saw it as a bond.
And on the other issue,
I saw and looked at the
words that he enunciated.
He really spoke a great deal
to freedom, to liberty, to
captive nations, he referred to
in his remarks.
He did talk about the importance
of values and even towards the
end of the speech expressed
how it's not just only about
military might, but it is also
about the will -- the will
of the people and,
towards that end, I did
not see that as a dark.
I saw that as underscoring
the kind of values that
we do hold very dearly.
WOODRUFF: So, if he was
stressing the common
values, Karen Donfried,
how then do you read
what the president has said?
Because we know it was on his
other trip to Europe where
he withheld a statement about
so-called Article 5, the mutual
commitment to defense among
the NATO countries, but this
time he did.
I mean, how do you square that?
DONFRIED: So, on the one hand,
I don't think we would have
been so focused on the more
traditional aspects of
the speech were it not
to the earlier trip
to Europe for a NATO
leaders meeting where the
president did not affirm
U.S. support for Article 5.
That's why it was significant.
But in that transatlantic
context, it was also significant
that he didn't mention the
European Union because
typically, the U.S. has
defined its relationship
with Europe both
through NATO, but also through
U.S. cooperation with this body
that emphasizes cooperation
among Europeans.
The second piece I would
mention is, I was struck by the
focus on values but I actually
searched the speech for the
word democracy, and it didn't
appear and that was striking
to me.
And though he did talk about
the importance of rule of law
and freedom of press in the
speech, when you looked at the
press conference he gave with
President Duda, he was asked
about the issue of the
press and said -- expressed
his concern about fake
news and the dishonest
media.
So, it was a bit of a
mixed message I thought
on those issues around
democratic principles.
WOODRUFF: Paula Dobriansky,
what about that?
I mean, we know the president's
view toward the press in the
United States has certainly
been a subject of controversy
and a lot of discussion
and debate recently.
DOBRIANSKY: Well, I think,
in the speech, which was his
primary platform, in my view,
not the press conference but the
primary platform where he had
an opportunity not just to speak
to Poland but, as I mentioned,
to the region at large, and
also to set the foundation for
his meetings coming up in
Hamburg and particularly
with President Putin
where he did underscore
this importance, as
I said, of communism.
He talked about it, about the
freedoms that were deprived,
the kind of oppression that
this region was under and how,
in terms of the present time,
this is a different period.
This is a period where
we do have to reaffirm
these kinds of values.
So, I saw it in a
broader strategic sense
of setting a foundation
that has applicability
to a number of the issues
that we've just mentioned,
not just Poland, the region at
large, but also for Russia.
WOODRUFF: Karen Donfried,
just about 30 seconds here.
But how does all this play
into expectation for tomorrow's
meeting between President Trump
and President Putin?
DONFRIED: So, it becomes much
more complicated for President
Trump when he gets -- well,
he is now in
Germany for the G20.
The Germany context is more
complicated, because you have a
German chancellor who's facing
reelection campaign
in September.
She has a public that
is not supportive of
President Trump's policies.
She very much values the
relationship with the U.S., so
she wants to try to reach an
agreement with President Trump
while also staying true to her
principle stands on climate
and trade.
So, it will become
very challenging.
The meeting with President Putin
will be something everyone will
be watching and it sounds, based
on his comments to the press
conference today, that he won't
be raising the issue of Russian
meddling in U.S. elections.
WOODRUFF: Yes.
He certainly -- he said,
yes, it may have happened
but it may not have.
He said nobody knows for
sure who was behind it.
DONFRIED: Which was
also a rebuke of U.S.
intelligence, I would say.
WOODRUFF: Karen Donfried, Paula
Dobriansky, we thank you both.
DONFRIED: Thank you so much.
(MUSIC)
WOODRUFF: Now to a major legal
case involving the alleged
smuggling of ancient religious
artifacts.
Late yesterday, the
Department of Justice
said that the nationwide
arts and crafts company
Hobby Lobby illegally
imported thousands of ancient
relics from the Middle East.
William Brangham has the story.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT: The government's
complaint against Hobby Lobby
involves the purchase
and importation of 5,500
rare clay tablets and
artifacts from Israel
and the UAE, antiquities that
likely once came from Iraq.
Prosecutors allege that
company missed several
red flags indicating
that this purchase was
highly suspicious.
Hobby Lobby argues this
was an innocent mistake
caused by inexperience.
In an agreement with the Justice
Department, the company must
now turn over all the artifacts
and pay $3 million.
Hobby Lobby is a family-owned
evangelical Christian company.
They were at the center of the
2014 Supreme Court case that
ruled companies can't be forced
to cover birth control for their
employees, and they're also
constructing a multimillion
dollar bible museum here
in Washington, D.C. that
will open this fall.
For more on this case, I'm
joined now by Deborah Lehr.
She's chairman of George
Washington University's
Capitol Archaeological
Institute and she's
founder of the Antiquities
Coalition, which works to stop
the looting of world cultures.
Welcome to the "NewsHour".
Can you tell me just the basics?
What is -- you heard what I said
about the overview of this case.
What is the government alleging
that Hobby Lobby did wrong here?
DEBORAH LEHR, FOUNDER,
ANTIQUITIES COALITION:
The government is alleging
that they imported
knowingly items from
Iraq and that they used
falsified shipping labels
and that they didn't
get the appropriate import
permits to be able to
bring these antiquities
into the country.
BRANGHAM: And what
are these antiquities?
What are the items that
we're talking about?
LEHR: They are things, as you
said, that are destined for
their biblical museum, and they
are clay tablets and cylinder
seals and ancient items that
were part of that time period in
Iraq.
BRANGHAM: So, my understanding
is the company says these were
not destined for the museum,
they said they were just part
of their larger collection.
But the government also argues
that there were all sorts of
red flags that should have
tipped off Hobby Lobby
that this was not an
appropriate purchase to make.
Can you tell us what were
some of those red flags?
LEHR: Absolutely.
First, Hobby Lobby is a
sophisticated importer
and they know very well
that you have to designate
the country of origin and the
appropriate tariff line when
bringing these into the country.
This was not done.
These items, instead of being
declared as antiquities, were
declared as clay tiles or
samples.
They were not noted that they
were coming from Iraq but,
instead, that they were coming
from turkey, and it's no mistake
that we have an agreement with
Iraq that if they were being
brought in and declared coming
from Iraq, they would have
to get an appropriate permit.
Yet, we don't have a similar
type of agreement with Turkey.
They're also coming from a part
of the world where conflict
antiquities are being actually
excavated by groups like Daesh
or ISIS, and knowingly being
exported and used as a means
for funding terrorism.
And so, there are quite a few
red flags that they should have
known, and at a minimum they
should have done provenance
research, which they didn't do.
What they actually paid
five individuals through
seven different accounts
and, as I said, then,
shipped these in different
packets, which might
be understandable, but
to several different
locations in the United States
and without the appropriate
or accurate shipping records.
BRANGHAM: Now, the company
agreed they're going to give
back these items and willing
to pay this $3 million
to the government.
The company argues that they
are new to this business and
that this was really sort of
a rookie mistake, that
inexperience is what
caused these problems,
not any intentional
looking past these
concerns you've raised.
LEHR: Well, that's a very
interesting argument for a group
that has a business that's based
largely on importing into the
country, and it's those two
claims that they are actually
being fined for.
We could understand
potentially that they
may not be sophisticated
about the specifics
of what importing antiquities
from Iraq are involved, but
they are building a museum where
they are importing and
collecting historic items
from around the world.
So, we hope that there are
not other rookie mistakes that
they have made within their
bible museum and the
antiquities that are there.
BRANGHAM: I mean, Hobby Lobby
is certainly not the first
organization or institution
to sort of trip this
particular wire.
I mean, major cultural
institutions in the
United States in the
past have had similar
problems.
I mean, this is -- it's
not an uncommon problem.
LEHR: Well, it's not an uncommon
problem, but we haven't seen
a find quite this large,
and that it's very hard to bring
about these kinds of cases,
though we commend the United
States government and
certainly ICE for the
seizures that they're making.
But the trade in antiquities
and the list of antiquities
is a global problem, and we're
seeing it on the increase as
we see conflict in the Middle
East and -- where there are
millions of sites still
yet to be excavated.
It's very much just an
endless, almost excavation
that's out there for
thieves to take advantage
of.
BRANGHAM: As we mentioned,
they're building this enormous
museum and some of Hobby Lobby's
40,000 other items apparently
are destined to go into this
museum, and other experts
in antiquities have raised
concerns about the speed at
which some of those items were
gathered.
Have you heard
those same concerns?
LEHR: Yes, we've heard those
same concerns and one hopes
they have actually tone the
type of provenance research
that they should be doing to
ensure these are not part of the
illicit trade.
They actually had consulted one
of the leading cultural heritage
lawyers in the case of this
specific import with items
coming of these 5,000 items
who had recommended that they
do a lot more
additional research.
And so, they actually
had ignored the warning
they received from
their own attorney.
BRANGHAM: All right.
Deborah Lehr of the Antiquities
Coalition, thanks so much.
LEHR: Thank you very much.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
(MUSIC)
WOODRUFF: now, the Trump
administration has set a lower
refugee limit for the U.S. for
this fiscal year.
In the coming week, the U.S.
will hit that ceiling of
accepting 50,000 new refugees.
The city of Utica, New
York, has long taken a
more welcoming approach.
One out of every four citizens
there is a refugee and the
evidence is they're helping
revitalize the community.
Paul Solman has our update.
It's part of his weekly
series, "Making Sense".
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
PAUL SOLMAN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT (voice-over):
Post-industrial Utica,
New York, upstate,
downtrodden, and, in the heart
of downtown, where the United
Methodist Church used to
be, a thriving mosque.
In the world beyond Utica,
the tide of refugees rises,
the fear of foreigners swells.
Muslim terrorists, real
and imagined, haunt us.
TRUMP: Donald J. Trump is
calling for a total and complete
shutdown of Muslims entering
the United States until our
country's representatives
can figure out what
the hell is going on.
SOLMAN: President Trump's
calls for even a partial Muslim
ban were repeatedly rebuffed
in court, but the Supreme Court
has now let some of it stand
until it considers the ban's
legality this fall.
But when we asked Utica
Mayor Robert Palmieri
if the city would be
willing to resettle Syrian
refugees --
MAYOR ROBERT PALMIERI,
UTICA, NEW YORK: I would say,
absolutely, we would be, because
Utica starts with you.
It's as simple as that.
SOLMAN: There's the humanitarian
aspect, of course, America's
historic promise to extend
a hand to huddled masses
yearning to breathe free.
But Utica likes the economics.
PALMIERI: They're
willing to work and they
work extremely hard.
It's the rebound
for our great city.
SOLMAN: Refugee resettlement as
an economic development tool,
a Rust Belt revival strategy
Utica has pioneered.
After decades of decline --
the city lost a third of its
population when its factories
closed -- Utica is growing
again, back up to 62,000 people,
thanks in part to its reputation
as, quote, the town that loves
refugees, who now make up one
out of every four residents.
Thousands are Muslims from
Bosnia, refugees of the
war there in the 1990s.
SAKIB DURACAK, BOSNIAN
WAR REFUGEE: Basically,
we left everything what
we have at that time
and start from zero again.
SOLMAN: Sakib Duracak,
who trained in Bosnia
as a construction
engineer, started a small
business in Utica rehabbing
cheap, often crumbling,
houses for refugees
looking to build a new
life.
DURACAK: A huge opportunity,
because, at the time when we
came in Utica, it's a relatively
very dead and poor city.
SOLMAN: Bosnians have
visibly spruced up Utica's
east side and beyond.
But there's an even more
basic reason to welcome
refugees to a town like Utica.
ELLEN KRALY, COLGATE UNIVERSITY:
To have an economy, you have
to have workers, and you
have to have consumers.
SOLMAN: Professor Ellen
Kraly teaches demography at
nearby Colgate University.
KRALY: The influx of refugees
to Utica allowed us to retain
some smaller industries that
were looking for
highly motivated labor.
SOLMAN: And if past suffering
helps fuel motivation, Thada
Paw has plenty to spare.
THADA PAW, KAREN REFUGEE:
I work very hard because I
want to live American life.
SOLMAN: An ethnic Karen,
a persecuted minority
in Burma, she spent 23
years starting at age
four in refugee
camps in Thailand.
When she was 14 --
PAW: Burmese army, they
just shoot our refugee
camp and make it burn.
My sister's best
friend, she burn alive.
SOLMAN: A week later,
her 17-year-old sister
committed suicide.
PAW: I think she tired of life.
Whole, our life, we have to
run, run, run, run for safety.
SOLMAN: Paw came to Utica nine
years ago, worked as a nursing
home aide and housekeeper
while studying English, then
as a medical interpreter.
Four years ago, she
joined the direct sales
firm Mary Kay Cosmetics.
Within months, she'd
worked her way up to the
coveted pink Cadillac.
PAW: I travel in
Albany, Buffalo.
It's really hard, but
now I love to live here.
SOLMAN: OK, so we get why
refugees for Utica, but
why Utica for refugees?
IBRAHIM ROSIC, BOSNIAN WAR
REFUGEE: Utica was close to
Syracuse, and Tom Cruise is from
Syracuse.
So I thought I was
going to see Tom Cruise.
SOLMAN: Sadly, for Bosnian
refugee Ibrahim Rosic,
no Cruise, happily,
the Mohawk Valley
Resource Center.
SHELLY CALLAHN, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, MOHAWK VALLEY RESOURCE
CENTER: We receive $1,125
federal to be spent on behalf
of each arriving refugee.
SOLMAN: With those dollars,
says executive director Shelly
Callahan, the refugee center
rents an apartment, furnishes
it, gets the utilities turned
on, and starts teaching the
basics.
CALLAHAN: So, it's how to lock
your door, how to work the
stove, the thermostat, the
plumbing.
SOLMAN: There are
also English lessons.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Is somebody
sitting to the left of you?
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Left?
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Yes.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Right?
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Left, right.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: You
have got to shop around.
SOLMAN: Introductions
to strange new foods.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Celery.
We're going to make
celery and kale.
SOLMAN: And for those who
can drive, the all-important
class in parking tickets,
a veritable auditorium
of Babel.
But within a few months,
they're on their own.
CALLAHAN: They actually come
here owing their airfare back
to the federal government.
So, they are expected to get
a job as soon as possible.
SOLMAN: Although there are no
hard statistics on how many
refugees do or don't find jobs
after their aid ends, some
qualify for public assistance.
Ibrahim Rosic was literally torn
apart in the Bosnian conflict.
ROSIC: In 1994, I
stepped on a landmine.
I lost my left leg, and my
right leg was severely damaged.
I have no knee.
I can't bend it.
SOLMAN: He is officially
100 percent disabled, but,
says the former engineer --
ROSIC: I work two jobs.
I work full-time as a
director at Mohawk Valley
Community College, and I
also work as an adjunct
instructor at SUNY Poly.
I am not a burden
on the community.
on social services.
Yes, community helped
me to get this, but now
it's my time to pay back.
And I would say most
refugees do the same.
SOLMAN: So, are refugees the
economic boon that motivated
immigrants famously have been?
Yes, says economist Jeffrey
Sachs, but there are negatives.
JEFFREY SACHS, ECONOMIST,
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY:
Some workers face
increased job competition
and their wages
can be driven down.
If lower-skilled immigrants
come, then lower-skilled
American workers may
see a decline in their
wages, whereas business
owners may see more workers
at lower cost for them.
SOLMAN: And what if, as
many Americans fear, even
just a few are terrorists?
Shelly Callahan's response?
This isn't Europe.
CALLAHAN: Refugees are
the most intensively
screened immigrants
really to come to this
country, about two years
of intense scrutiny
by the Department of
Homeland Security, the
FBI, ICE, Department of State.
There's DNA testing involved.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: For those
people who is proven as bad
people, we don't want them here.
SOLMAN: The al Saad family,
Palestinians who for decades
lived in Baghdad, fled during
the troop surge of 2007, the
deadliest year of the Iraq war.
YOUSIF AL SAAD, PALESTINIAN
REFUGEE: I got kidnapped there
by, I don't know, some militia.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: One
of my other brothers, too.
AL SAAD: My other brother.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:
They beat him up.
AL SAAD: He got beat up.
I lost many friends of mine.
SOLMAN: They spent three years
in a camp on the Syrian border,
before being cleared for
transit to the United States.
Yousif al Saad went to work
at the Chobani yogurt plant
outside Utica, whose CEO, Hamdi
Ulukaya, has championed
the rights of refugees and
hired hundreds of them.
We were supposed to tape there,
but at the last minute, Chobani
pulled out, citing security
concerns, fear for the safety
of employees in the current
political environment.
Understandably, as right
wing media had targeted
a Chobani plant in Twin
Falls, Idaho, where
some 30 percent of the
workers are refugees.
ALEX JONES, INFO WARS: So,
let's look at the headlines.
SOLMAN: According to
conspiracy theorist Alex
Jones, citing Breitbart --
JONES: TB spiked 500 percent
in Twin Falls during 2012 as
Chobani yogurt opened the plant.
Idaho refugee boys admit to
sexually assaulting 5-year-old.
OK.
Twin Falls refugee rape
special report: why
are refugees moving in?
Oh, the Chobani plant.
SOLMAN: But the sexual assault
by minors is shrouded in
secrecy, and the TB case spike
was from one positive test to
six, in a nearly 12,000 square
mile area that included twin
falls, none of the cases
contagious, none involving
Chobani employees.
JONES: This isn't
some game people.
There's a total Islamic
takeover taking place.
Behind the scenes, they got
Muslims following me around.
SOLMAN: In April, the
company sued Jones for false
and defamatory reports.
JONES: And I'm ready
to take them on.
Christ, please help us win this.
Please help me be strong.
SOLMAN: The following
month, Jones issued an
apology and a retraction.
JONES: On behalf of Info Wars, I
regret that we mischaracterized
Chobani, its employees
and the people of Twin
Falls, Idaho, the way we did.
SOLMAN: Two final follow-ups:
unemployment in Twin Falls
has dropped from 7 percent to
3 percent since Chobani
came to town in 2012.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Please
remain standing for the
Pledge of Allegiance.
SOLMAN: And the Trump
administration is seeking
to cut the number of
refugees allowed annually
into the U.S., from
110,000 to 50,000.
CROWD: With liberty
and justice for all.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Let's
have a round of applause
for our new citizens.
(APPLAUSE)
SOLMAN: Last February in Utica,
Yousif al Saad joined 29 others,
from 15 different countries
in becoming a U.S. citizen.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:
Congratulations.
Your new flag.
SOLMAN: Almost
all were refugees.
We leave the last word to
Judge David Peebles (ph).
DAVID PEEBLES (ph), JUDGE:
America is now your country.
I cannot overemphasize the
need now, more than ever, for
you and your fellow citizens
to unite, answer the call
and assist in bettering
our society and our world.
Congratulations on
becoming a citizen of the
greatest nation on Earth.
God bless all of you
and God bless America.
(APPLAUSE)
SOLMAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour", this is economics
correspondent Paul Solman.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
JUDY WOODRUFF, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: The technology
sector, and especially
the start-up culture
in Silicon Valley, has long been
criticized for its record on
diversity, gender and inclusion.
Now, the spotlight is
being shone a spotlight
on the investors and
funders in the valley.
Here's Hari Sreenivasan.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
HARI SREENIVASAN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT: The scrutiny
has intensified in recent weeks
after two publications, "The
Information" and "The New York
Times," documented how prominent
venture capitalists had
been accused of making
unwanted sexual advances
through texts, phone
calls and physical intimidation.
These powerful investors used
their power to harass dozens
of women in whose companies
they might invest.
It led to the resignation of
Dave McClure, who was the CEO
of tech incubator, 500 Startups.
McClure apologized after he was
accused of harassment by other
women and wrote to a prospective
employee, quote, I was getting
confused figuring out whether
to hire you or hit on you.
Freada Kapor Klein is an
entrepreneur and leading voice
pushing companies to increase
culture and diversity.
Kapor Klein and her husband
invest in several startups,
including some funds run by 500
Startups.
She joins me now from Oakland.
So, Freada, you have been
working on this for decades.
Why are those two stories in the
past couple of weeks resonating?
FREADA KAPOR KLEIN, FOUNDER,
LEVEL PLAYING INSTITUTE: Well,
I think, finally, Silicon
Valley is willing to look at
itself and to recognize it
may be on the leading edge of
investing in tech.
It's certainly on the
trailing edge of dealing
with its own ecosystem,
diversity and inclusion
in particular.
SREENIVASAN: Why is it --
KAPOR KLEIN: Venture capital --
SREENIVASAN: Go ahead.
KAPOR KLEIN: Pardon?
I was going to say, venture
capital is now looking at
behaviors that it's engaging in
that were addressed on Wall
Street more than 20 years ago.
SREENIVASAN: there aren't
exactly any stats on this,
but how pervasive is it?
I mean, you've started projects
to include women and people
of color to try to foster
change in the pipeline and it's
important to point out that
this isn't just about gender.
This is also about race and
sexual orientation sometimes.
KAPOR KLEIN: Exactly, and I
think a term that's a bit bulky
but a very important concept,
what we see is
intersectionality,
meaning we can have
multiple identities.
It's important to point out
that the women who told their
stories to the information
about binary capital and the
women who came forward against
Dave McClure in the "New York
Times," all of those were
women of color, and talking
about unwelcome advances from
Caucasian men.
So, we need to look at that
racial dynamic as it's layered
in with the gender dynamic.
And you're absolutely right.
It's an abuse of power.
SREENIVASAN: One of the
interesting things people point
out about Uber is that there
were so many different
scandals where nothing
happened to the CEO really
until his big investors
signed a letter and
asked him to step down.
It seems that money
talks much louder here.
KAPOR KLEIN: Unfortunately,
money does talk much louder.
I think we've hit an era in
venture capital where greed is
everything and it, again, mimics
Wall Street in the 1990s where
greed is good was a commonplace
statement and, in fact,
in a commencement speech.
I think now we have to
look at is the only thing
that matters dollars?
Is it the dollars that get
invested in the entrepreneur?
Is it the, quote-unquote,
unicorn status meaning
the billion-dollar
evaluation of a startup?
And when are we going to expand
the ledger sheet to include
how people are treated, to
include how venture capital
and startups behave as citizens
of the communities and of the
country.
SREENIVASAN: So, how do you
change that dynamic for venture
funding that's all chasing those
unicorns, they all want to get
rich quick, they all want to
fund the right startup that's
going to make billions
and billions of dollars,
and it seems that
they're almost enabling
a culture that goes on because,
hey, it's all about profits?
KAPOR KLEIN: Well, I think
that's right, and I think there
are several groups that are
going to need to join
forces to make that change.
The venture capital
community itself has to
say, wait a second, we
aren't with the bottom
of the bottom here, and
we need to work to clean
up our own industry.
But we also need to see the
limited partners who invest
in these venture funds need to
start doing different kinds of
due diligence, different kinds
of demands about diversity
and inclusion in the venture
capital firm itself, in the
companies that are funded and
the values of the
startups that are created.
So, the limited partners
can create a lot of change.
The entrepreneurs
themselves, one of the
things we need to point
out is that venture capital
as currently constructed
is leaving billions of
dollars on the table
because they're overlooking
underrepresented entrepreneurs
who have great ideas and who
can serve real communities'
real needs.
SREENIVASAN: All right.
Freada Kapor Klein joining
us from Oakland tonight.
Thanks so much.
KLEIN: Thank you.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: Chuck Berry was a
pioneer in his field, often
referred to as the father of
rock 'n' roll who influenced
a generation of musicians.
Now, three months after
his death at age 90,
he's back, in a way.
Jeffrey Brown explains.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
JEFFREY BROWN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT: You know
it when you hear it.
Beginning in the mid-1950s,
Chuck Berry helped define the
sound and look, the attitude and
raw power of rock 'n' roll.
The man is now gone, but his
music lives on, in a new album,
titled "Chuck," berry's first
album since 1979.
He'd worked on the project off
and on for several decades,
and on his 90th birthday,
five months before his
death, had announced
its imminent release.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: So,
here's one of his Cadillacs.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Yes.
BROWN: I was joined recently
by the star's son Charles and
grandson Charlie at the National
Museum of African-American
History and Culture for some
personal memories of the man and
his music.
CHARLES BERRY, JR., SON OF
CHUCK BERRY: This was a guy
when he was a little boy he sold
vegetables off a
cart with his father.
This is a man that worked
at a General Motors
plant, not assembling the
cars, but as a janitor.
He heard from other people the
significance that he brought
to the table, but my -- he
didn't really dwell on that.
CHARLES BERRY III, GRANDSON
OF CHUCK BERRY: I remember in
elementary school, I'd have
teachers coming up to me
like, who's your grandfather?
I'd be like, pawpaw (ph).
They were like, that's so cool.
BROWN (on camera): Did
you have any idea who your
grandfather was in history?
CHARLES BERRY III: I always
knew he played the guitar,
but I didn't think he was like
this bigger than life
person to everybody else
because he was just pawpaw.
BROWN: Yes.
Oh, boy, did he play
the guitar, huh?
CHARLES BERRY III: Oh, yes.
BROWN (voice-over): In fact,
both Charles and Charlie play
the guitar and had the chance
to play with Chuck.
Charles is part of the
band for many years.
Since Chuck's death, they've
played on, here just recently
promoting the new album on "The
Tonight Show".
The album charts Chuck
Berry's life in stages,
an autobiographical
epitaph of sorts.
In the song "Big Boys," he
returns to his childhood with
the ambitions of a teenager,
while "The Eyes of Man"
describes the wisdom
of women in his life.
CHARLES BERRY JR.: It's almost
to the point that he was being
philosophical over his life
and letting everybody
else knows, like, hey,
from a wonderful woman
to a big boy to an
eye of a man, here's my book.
Here's the next chapter of
my life that you get to have,
and I hope you enjoy it.
BROWN: Berry continued to
perform into his late '80s,
including his renowned monthly
gig at Blueberry Hill,
a diner and music venue
in his native St. Louis.
ERIC CLAPTON, MUSICIAN: He's
really laid the law down for
playing that kind of music.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN, MUSICIAN:
When I'm 65 or 70, I've
got to tell my grandkids.
Yes, I met Chuck Berry.
As a matter of fact, I backed
up Chuck Berry one night.
You did?
Yes.
LITTLE RICHARD, MUSICIAN:
My favorite song with
Chuck is all of 'em.
BROWN: His influence is
everywhere in rock music.
The initial cultural jolt was
jokingly portrayed in the 1985
hit movie, "Back to the Future."
And honored nine years
later in" Pulp Fiction."
KEVIN STRAIT, MUSEUM CURATOR:
Rock and roll has such a firm
place in our cultural memory.
BROWN: Kevin Strait is
a musical historian and
curator at the museum.
STRAIT: He's one of the
primary sonic architects
of rock and roll.
So, he helped establish this
art form that we all know and
love, and that really sort
of took over the world.
Its helm really was this
young musician from St. Louis.
And, you know, he really sort
of helped to sort of establish
the template for how rock
and roll should sound.
You know, he's a
phenomenal guitar player,
phenomenal showman.
BROWN: Strait acquired objects
from Berry for the museum's
musical crossroads collection,
including this prized guitar.
STRAIT: This guitar
is pretty special.
It's a Gibson ES-350T.
I mean, it's one of his early
touring and recording guitars
that he used, and it's nicknamed
Maybellene after his first hit.
BROWN (on camera):
Yes, quite a first hit.
Quite a name, right?
(MUSIC)
BROWN (voice-over): And that
red 1973 Cadillac Eldorado?
Berry drove it on stage in
1986 for his 60th birthday and
the filming of the documentary
"Hail, Hail Rock 'n' Roll".
That was at the Fox Theater
in St. Louis, which had denied
him entry as a child because
he was black.
CHUCK BERRY, MUSICIAN:
And my forefathers a few
blocks away were sold
on the civil courthouse
steps, sold, and
that's a big change.
CHARLES BERRY JR.: It was
difficult, absolutely,
but as opposed to,
man, these white people
are just, they're playing me.
My God, I can't -- nope.
My dad took it as, oh, so you're
telling me I can't go in the
front of this venue to play
in front of this crowd.
OK, I'm going to keep
writing my music.
They're going to change.
I'm going to make it.
I'm going to make a scenario
where the people that are
listening to my music are having
such a blast that skin
color becomes irrelevant.
BROWN (on camera): How do you
see what your grandfather,
what he went through and what
he achieved?
CHARLES BERRY III: That you
could go from selling out a
packed house to then being told
you can't stay in
this hotel room.
That is like I that probably
would have left me pretty
bitter throughout the rest of my
life.
But I don't know because what
he's done with his music and
everything, it's just that much
more amazing because he was
able to do it during that time.
BROWN: A pioneering life
that had dramatic ups
and downs, for sure.
Now, "Chuck" the album
adds new music to what was
already an enormous legacy.
For the "PBS NewsHour", I'm
Jeffrey Brown in Washington.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: Love his music.
And now to another in our
"Brief but Spectacular Series".
Tonight, we hear
from Georgina Kleege.
She's a lecturer in the English
department at the University
of California, Berkeley.
Her forthcoming book is "More
Than Meets the Eye: What
Blindness Brings to Art."
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
GEORGINA KLEEGE, LECTURER,
UC BERKELEY DEPARTMENT
OF ENGLISH: It's a common
experience for people
with disabilities to feel that
they are being stared at or to
notice they are being stared
at.
And in fact, blind people
can feel that, too, a kind of
collective intake of breath even
if nobody says anything, you can
tell when you attract attention.
I am legally blind, I
became legally blind, I was
diagnosed when I was 11.
I probably lost my vision
gradually over a few years.
I remember feeling that I
wasn't supposed to feel anything
about it, because there wasn't
anything anybody could do.
My complicated relationship
with Helen Keller
came from childhood.
She was held up as this
role model that she
was deaf and blind, but
she was always cheerful
and she did well in school and
you never heard her complain.
I took this very personally.
I took this as a
reproach towards me.
So I hated Helen Keller and I
loved Helen Keller jokes and
I, you know, told them with
relish in the schoolyard.
I started to wonder if I
had been unfair to Helen
Keller when I was a child.
I ended up writing a book
about her, which is a series
of letters by me, to her, and
she doesn't write back
because she's dead.
It's basically me asking
questions about different
moments in her life
and calling her out and
asking her to explain herself.
And so, it was a way for me to
enter her life imaginatively.
I tell my students all the
time that they should tell
their friends not to text while
walking because I am always
bumping into people who
are texting while walking.
And then they make themselves
a hazard to blind people,
because I am counting on all
the other pedestrians to pay
attention, to see me coming
and to get out of my way.
I think there is still
discrimination in
all sorts of arenas.
There's problems with access
to Web sites and electronic
media and so on and so forth,
captioning, audio description.
The technology exists, people
know how to do this, but
it's not as if everything is
made accessible.
The problem is that
people's understanding of
blindness is very limited.
There's the sort of
joke scenario of a blind
person coming to an
intersection and somebody
grabbing their arm and leading
them across the street when
in fact they wanted to go
in a different direction.
That's never happened to me
and I think part of it is jus
that I tend to look like I know
where I'm going.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: I
would agree with that.
(LAUGHTER)
KLEEGE: My name is Georgina
Kleege and this is my brief but
spectacular take on blindness.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: And we
thank you, Georgina.
And you can watch additional
"Brief but Spectacular"
episodes on our Web site,
pbs.org/newshour/brief.
And that is the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening with
David Brooks and Ruth Marcus.
For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour", thank you
and we'll see you soon.